When we say what does geoeng engineering
mean? This would be the first time we
consciously decide to globally affect
climate to our benefit. Engineering on
purpose, right? You're talking about the
radiation that's coming in and
greenhouse gas is trapped. It literally
becomes kind of a a bounce board. It's
called science. Yeah. It's so cool,
isn't it? It's pretty cool.
[Music]
This is Star Talk. Neil deGrass Tyson
here, your personal astrophysicist, and
this is special edition and we're going
to be talking about
[Music]
geoengineering. Gary, you cooked this
up. Yes. My co-host Gary here. How you
doing, man? I'm good. All right. You're
looking in good shape. Um, breathing in
as we've discussed. Breathing in. It's
the breathing out I'm not doing.
Yes or no? Welcome back as my co-host.
Pleasure. All right. So, Gary, what did
you say? All right. So, the annual Isaac
Azimoff Memorial Debate takes place here
in the Hayden Planetarium and this year
in 2025, it is geoengineering the pros
and the cons. Um, seen by many as
controversial. It's an approach to
solving solving global warming, but
there are others see it as potential as
very very effective. There are a number
of different options up for
consideration, but uh with them come not
just scientific issues, but ethical
considerations as well. So, pre-debate,
we kidnapped two of the panelists.
Sorry. And we've dragged them, locked
them in the office, and we're going to
have our own debate cuz we couldn't wait
until this evening. So, uh did they did
they come willingly help? Of course.
He's still in a box. Who we have here?
Danielle Vision. Danielle, welcome to
Star Talk. Thank you, Neil. Thank you.
Yeah. Let me get a little bit of your
bio here. Assistant professor in the
department of earth and atmospheric
science at Cornell. Thanks for coming
down state to join us here. Is it still
snowing in Cornell? It snows there all
the time. It is. Yes, it does. Yes, it
is. And it does. Yeah, we get it. Uh
you're a climate scientist specializing
in this cottage industry of people who
care about stratospheric aerosols
and their behavior. Oo. whether they
misbehave or behave as you intend.
That's that's your whole Let's find out.
And you're also a specialist in what
they're calling climate intervention
methods and what its impact would be on
the climate, on ecosystems, and even on
culture, societies.
So, I mean, what a damn that's a very
high responsibility.
Yeah, it is. In other words, don't mess
up. Yeah. If I lining up every lapel to
say don't mess this up I you know so who
had the idea that this is a thing that
would work people have been discussing
it for decades I would say some people
point to Edward Teller actually being
the first one discussing teller of the
Hbomb fame indeed or infamy um right
people had discussion about could we
fundamentally deliberately alter climate
for a long time right as for as long as
we understood what climate my weather
machine. I will one day rule the world.
Yeah. Yeah. No indeed. So it was it is
in a way one could say nothing new
except then as the problem of global
warming of climate change became more
and more preminent more and more
scientists started thinking about this
maybe a bit more deeply. So it wasn't
just a fringe idea. It was a fringe idea
in the sense that a lot of people no
initially but now no longer fringe. Many
would still consider it fringe or at
least would like not to talk about it
too much. That's different. Okay. Okay.
In that fringe in that sense as I would
say that the scientific basis is as well
established as for most of climate
science but the most of the issues being
in sort of the ethical societal
dimension bring this topic into a
different light. So as I understood from
my bit of reading here, you had some
prior awareness and understanding of
this problem or this solution with
volcanoes. Mhm. Because they they pump
all manner of nastiness. Yeah. Nastiness
into the atmosphere. Nasty. Nastiness.
Into the atmosphere. And you get to
study that. That's nature doing it. And
so what have you found from the history
of volcanoes? Yeah. So the interesting
thing is that it was Benjamin Franklin,
one of the first Everybody loves Ben.
Yeah. And he was a great scientist too.
He was the first person to point out
that potentially the weirdness in
climate that people had seen in the
early 19th century were due to the
Tambbora eruption, a volcano in
Indonesia exploding in 1815.
Okay. So he's around of course at that
time. Just remind me, I think Indonesia
also has Crakatoa. I mean, there's no
shortage of volcanic. There's plenty of
volcanoes in the tropical band. Yes.
Yes. Close to the equator. And sometimes
they just go off. They explode. Yeah.
And you get to see which way the ejector
goes. Like it goes west to east, right?
Following prevailing air currents. So
people get to study this. And he was
clever enough to connect the dots
between odd weather and an odd
atmospheric phenomenon, a volcano. Okay.
So this is some of your foundational
background for how you go forward from
that. Yes. In the 20th century then
there were at least three different
volcanic eruptions. Not as big as
Tambora but still big enough. The last
one being Pinatubo in 1991. And you know
I was observing at a
telescope and when Pinatubo went off it
changed the optical properties of the
atmosphere. We had to redo all of our
data. Pissed me off.
It's not all about you. Not not your
favorite volcano, I assume. Cuz I was at
the telescope when the stuff came by,
right? Not when it went off, but it took
a while took a while. Once again,
scientists taking their cue from mother
nature. And I don't mean that
sarcastically. It's a fact. No, it's
great. Yes. So with putting it's sulfate
aerosol. What? Tell me what what is an
aerosol? Okay. So by aerosol us climate
scientists define just every kind of
solid or liquid particle suspended in
air. The suspended part that makes it an
aerosol. Yes. The suspended part. Yes.
Yes. Okay. This that the fact that it
can be suspended at all makes it an
aerosol no matter what it is like SARS
KV2. Mhm. You see that that's a very
interesting thing. There were there were
a lot of discussion about what
constituted an aerosol when it came to
the discussion around COVID because
there were different definition between
what climate scientists consider an
aerosol. These very tiny particles
submicron scale they float around for a
long whileic droplet is a millionth of a
meter. So very small very small. So
gravity doesn't really do much.
Turbulence actually keeps them afloat.
and the very large droplets like the one
like spit that medical practitioners
consider aerosol aerosol. Right? So
there was this was a lot of the
confusion at the beginning around around
airborne two slightly different usages
of the term like the term of the same
term same term to get to reducing mean
temperatures here on earth. What science
do those aerosols have to perform? By
mean temperatures you mean average mean.
These are the temperatures that make fun
of the lower temperatures. They're mean
temperatures. They're pissed off
temperatures. There you go. Okay, go. So
the aerosols we we think about again
submicron scale that's ends up being the
same size of the wavelength of most of
the visible light that we get. Oh, so
they are at the specific size where they
really interact a lot with incoming
sunlight. That's wild. So it's
photochemical. It's actual more like
geometric. No, it's a physical block.
There's also some chemistry but mainly
all of the aerosols that are around that
size will reflect will interact with
solar radiation through me scattering uh
through various scattering processes and
scattering this MIE scattering. So
that's a simple scattering where the
wavelength of the light matches the
particle and then it redirects it
because it goes off. But we have like
scattering is a different kind of
scatter that gives us the blue sky. the
blue sky. That's very much a whole
episode. That's for light. Yes, that was
great. By the way, that makes so much
sense because what's you're talking
about the radiation that's coming in and
greenhouse gas is primarily carbon as
trapped. Carbon dioxide, sorry, is
trapped because when the ground radiates
heat, it's the atmosphere that's
trapping a different wavelength.
Correct. Completely right. Infrareds.
Infrareds. Right. So, that's so wild. It
it it literally becomes kind of a a
bounce board. It's called science. Yeah.
It's so cool, isn't it? It's pretty
cool. How about that? I'm just saying.
You can still call it wild, but at the
end of the day, it's science. So, for
this process to be successful to the
level that we would all want it to be
successful, how much aerosols do you
have to put into the stratosphere? How
long is it there? I mean, who gets to
argue over where you put them? Does it
matter then on seasonality and what have
we learned from volcanoes about where it
goes, right? And if I remember
correctly, I think it was the late ' 80s
where there was there was talk of
nuclear winter where a total nuclear
exchange would burn forest, put I guess
aerosols in the atmosphere, blocking
sunlight, plunging all the earth into
darkness and cold into so that would be
a bad effect of it, but now you're
trying to make it a good effect. Mhm.
So, let me I all great questions, but
they can all and it can also all be
connected, right? So, aerosols, we
already have aerosols all around us,
right? Most of the pollution, the haze
that you see in New York City, that's
pollution. Those are aerosols, right?
But it makes for a lovely sunset. Let's
be real. Makes a lovely sunset. It's
super bad for your health. When you when
you burn fossil fuels, you burn coal,
you produce these aerosols that are
super bad for your health. And once they
has never been worse, it's a beautiful
sunset. Wait for this. I want to hear
this. I need to I'm just trying to
think. So they come down and they come
down mostly we burn them very close to
where we live. They stay in the air but
they are below the clouds. So whenever
then there's rain they just get washed
out away. Right. So actually currently
we just to be clear a raindrop forms on
these particles absorbs the not as much
for sulfate. Sulfate is actually not a
as well as good as a cloud nuclei as
other kind of particles. Not all not all
aerosol particles. But when they say
something things rain out, they
typically mean that the droplet formed
on these particles. No, it can also mean
that the droplet while falling absorbs
these tinier particles. That's called
wet deposition or wash out of our What's
the real term? Uh wet
deposition. Wash out. I love that. Yeah.
So normally we emit as humans just as
pollution over a 100red million tons of
sulfur dioxide which is the precursor of
all sulfate aerosols uh per year 100
million tons it's a lot and most of that
falls down close to where we live right
acid rain people who are alive in the
80s not me but people who are alive in
the 80s will remember acid rain never
because wait just so I get my chemistry
remember my chemistry sulfur dioxide is
not itself acid but if combine with a
hydrogen you get hydro
H2SO4 which is itself sulfuric acid and
that would be the acid range. SO2 gets
oxidized by O the radical O which is
present everywhere in the atmosphere and
this then eventually results another
three reactions and results SO3 and then
H2SO4 got and then this H2SO4 it's in
vapor form sulfuric acid and then tends
to nucleate into sulfuric acid particles
liquid aerosol droplet acid rain. Yep.
and as it rained. So back in the 80s,
the US was emitting way more sulfur than
it is now. And so the global emissions
were 160 million, 150 million tons. Now
we're getting the US has been going down
for a while. Europe as well, China and
India have been going up, but in
general, we're still around 100 million
tons. These aerosol particles do have a
cooling effect. We know this. The IPCC,
the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate
Change, has known these for a while.
They do cover up a small fraction of the
warming produced by the greenhouse
gases. What you're saying is our effort
to clean up the air has taken these
particles out
and
thereby increased the effects of global
warming. Unmasked. It has unmasked
unmasked. That's the word that that
normally it's used. It has unmasked part
of the global warming that before was
sort of hidden. So, and this is the
other part of the observation, right?
You need but to do this masking close to
the surface, you need hundreds of
millions of tons because these aerosols
stay just a couple of days. Mhm. Okay.
So, the idea behind something like
stratospheric aerosol injection is what
if you could put a tiny fraction of
these aerosols, they would stay though
for 100 times longer than they do at the
surface before falling down, right?
Months up to a year. Essentially, you
would get more bangs for your buck,
right? with just a smaller fraction you
would get the same amount of cooling but
far away from where people live and
breathe and you could get the same
effect while not pushing pull. So what
what's what makes the stratosphere
special for how long something would
last there? Is it because we're not
making clouds there? Right. So there's
no clouds, there's no water vapor. The
stratosphere is very dry. So there's no
rain out. But also the troposphere, it's
called troposphere because it's
turbulent, right? Because there are
turbulent the where we live, right?
where where airplanes are above the
troposphere there's a stratosphere that
is called like that because it's very
stratified things there's no turbulence
things move very slowly so once you I
never thought about that because if you
have turbulence it's turbulence up and
down and if you're up and down
turbulence it's not stratified so that's
why you call it stratosphere very good
thank you and so once you put in Italian
what is is it
stratosphera I knew it would be a cool
word stratosphere Well, that's where it
comes from, right? Yes. Yes. It's that
the original
Latinop Latin root. So, yeah, once you
put something especially in the tropical
stratosphere, that's where there is the
large scale what we call the breer doson
circulation. It's essentially this large
scale stratospheric circulation that
push thing pushes things up close to the
tropics and then pushes them pole wward.
So eventually the air that is in the
stratosphere goes back down but close to
the pole and it takes a year a year and
a half before a parcel of air that
originates or of any material that is in
the stratosphere goes all the way gets
removed from the stratosphere. Got it.
And you get a good spreading of the
effect. that too because right because
the other thing is that both on a
latitude but even more importantly on a
longitudinal way as in once if you put
and this is another one thing that makes
stratospheric aerosol injection complex
from a political point of view is that
you can't put these aerosols on top of
the US and they're not going to stay
there. They're going to spread
throughout definitely the whole
latitudinal band. So China which is on
the same latitude as the US or Europe
they're all these aerosols are going to
in a week. So longitudinally the winds
are very fast and so it in a week or two
there's a complete spread and we see
that with volcanoes all the time. Small
volcanic plumes spread in a couple of
weeks throughout the whole that's how I
know cuz I was in the Chilean Andes and
the Pinatubo was east of us that just
came due west just messed all to mess
you up mess mess me up. So when we had
that explosion in Iceland it brought
civil aviation to the ground. test to
see if he can pronounce the name of that
volcano. What was the name of that
volcano in Iceland? Everybody calls it a
a uh I have a lot of volcan
volcanologist. They just call it You got
the answer you deserved. That's the
answer I deserve. But that stopped air
traffic in and out of Heathrow and
everywhere in Europe. Yeah. But that was
not the sulfate because So do do we have
a potential issue because you say it's
going to sit above this area of
commercial airflight. Will it not
descend? So two things. So volcanoes
explode all the times and when they
explode the main thing they do the
short-term larger effect is the ash.
Right. Right. So that's the thing that
is very dangerous for aviation because
when ash interacts with the with the
aircraft it can up everything right. It
can glassify and so it can be a real
danger. Some volcanoes. Did you say
glassify? I think so. And I'm not sure
whether that's an actual scientific term
but let's pretend it is. I love that. So
this is the ash getting heated in the
engine, right? Turning into glass.
Glass. But wasn't it already heated in
the volcano? Right. But then it cools
down pretty quickly and so the ash
actually forms that way and then it can
sort of undergo So the ash is pretty
okay. So when people get buried in ash
like they did in Pompei. No, no. Uh no.
Pompei was not ash. Eolano was ash.
Okay. Pompei was a was just a magma.
Yeah. The lava was a magma flow. It it
was a actually a mud flow really. Oh,
that's right. That's why everything was
preserved. Preserved, right? That's
right. That's right. It was mud flow.
Yeah. So, I hadn't fully appreciated
what the ash was and what it can be at
its worst. Yeah. So, the this ash is the
first thing the thing you actually see.
You don't really see the sulfate, right?
But it's the thing that is dangerous
over a one, two days time scale a week,
right? Also, because this ash is also
very tiny and so you can breathe in.
It's very dangerous and so on and it's
dangerous for aviation. Some volcanic
eruptions also have what for climate
scientists is a lot of sulfate. Not all
volcanic eruptions also launch sulfate
in the atmosphere. For instance, Hunga
Tonga that happened in 2022 was a huge
volcanic eruption. There was almost no
sulfate. It was just water vapor pushed
up from from the ocean, but there was
almost no sulfate. Hunga Tonga had
something like 300,000 tons of sulfate.
Pinatubo had 17 million tons of sulfate
in a couple of hours. And how much does
a kuna matata have?
Um, I would have to go back and check my
numbers. I don't know. Good question.
So, we're putting aerosols into the
stratosphere and we've got the the
natural cycle Mhm. of the the wind
systems. How do you discuss this with
sovereign nations and and they say,
"Well, I don't want that flying over my
territory." who then owns the territory
above particular country. Do you have to
find your counterpart in every country
so that they can speak to their
governments to come to an agreement on
this? That's definitely what we do as
scientists. Yes, I constantly talk and
work with climate scientists from all
over the world. Um, for sure. For your
question though, I would say nobody
knows who the stratosphere belongs to.
The stratosphere of all places is
actually one of the least regulated. Uh
we know air airspace is in the
troposphere and so we know how what
who's who's liable for things that
happen in the troposphere and then
there's space and some other treaties
regulating that but nobody really had to
regulate the stratosphere for a long
time. The only treaty that exists is the
Montreal protocol for the for substances
that affect stratospheric ozone which
protects us from damaging ultraviolet
light. But that whole protocol was just
for the ozone. Just for the ozone. It
was just for the ozone. And a couple of
years ago there was an increase in one
of these ozone depleting substances that
was not predicted was not expected and
it took countries a year to figure out
from which country this depleting
substance this increasing depleting
substance was coming from. But even then
the hanging who which country was it?
Well it was a country in Asia. Okay.
Okay. uh even you see interesting thing
was that the agency the US scientific
agency that found out about where this
uh product was coming from couldn't just
point the finger and say this is coming
from you right they could say we think
that this increase is coming from this
region of the world but there was no
there is no enforcement mechanism even
in the mon protocol uh that could say oh
you have to stop I mean they the country
voluntarily agreed to stop right so a
lot of these international treaties
don't really have enforcement mechanisms
for the Montreal Protocol. It's all a
matter of all countries agreeing that
ozone is important and it should be
protected. I think more countries signed
that than any other treaty ever. It is
the most successful climate and
environmental protection treaty in the
world. Yeah. Every country signed it
because every country realized how
important it was to have an ozone year.
Yeah. So, Chuck, you missed it. Yeah.
Okay. It was a cosmic phenomenon that
affect mostly white people and so they
acted
they that is surprisingly correct. But
yeah,
what does it take to motivate the
powerful countries of the world? Yeah.
Just say not get their tan. If their tan
is at risk, you're going to lose the
beaches. Yeah.
So what could the stress aerosols
achieve? So first of all very clear
these aerosols cannot solve climate
change. Climate change is a whole other
problem. It comes from the greenhouse
gases that we have in it's a band-aid
say it's a band-aid. It's a stop gap.
You can call it however you want. It's
something you know some people
dismissively say well it's like taking
an aspirin if you have cancer. It's not
treating the underlying causes but even
if you have cancer you're the right to a
dignified life and not to suffer from
other pains, right? And so in a way is a
band-aid in the sense that yes it could
help temperature from going up right it
could prevent further warming and this
way could reduce some of the risks that
come from this warming that we know are
going to come from this warming and that
we already observing are coming with the
warming that we see now. So a couple
questions fast ones. Mhm. Climate seems
to me even as an astrophysicist to be an
immensely complex problem to solve given
all the variables given the turbulence
in an atmosphere with gas and different
gas species and the interaction of the
atmosphere with the ocean and the land
all of this. So is
AI helping you in any of this? We are
definitely exploring a lot of ways in
which AI could help reading the the huge
amount of data that we already have. For
instance, from satellite observation of
things like plumes coming out of
volcanoes. Nobody could look at all of
them, right? That's what AI is very good
at. Pattern recognition, finding stuff
that humans would have a hard time with.
So, this is really an emerging field,
but there's a lot of interesting things
that we are starting to do with AI.
Okay. So then here's a risk that I
learned about and I just want to know is
it authentic and is it the worst thing
to worry about? If the temperature
starts rising and you say we need more
aerosols and so you got this these two
competing forces you get to tamp it down
then there's a terrorist attack on the
people putting up the aerosols. Then the
aerosol falls out. Mhm. And now you have
a catastrophic shock to the system
because the the greenhouse gases going
up. Thought you were masking for so
long. You were asking for so long then
it's instantly you have a catastrophic
exposure to greenhouse warming. How much
do you think about contingencies here?
Mhm. That's a great question and I would
say it is something to worry about
except I would say it would not be
instantaneous if you stopped putting
since these aerosols stay for so long.
If you stop putting them for a day, a
week, a month, nothing really changes
because the aerosols stay on for a long
time. Now, if you stop for a year or two
years, that's where you unmask all the
worm, right? So, this is your So, that
gives you some you have time. You have a
cushion. Yeah. to find the terrorist to
find the terrorist and kick their ass
and rebuild and rebuild but of course
you would have I think this is a very
valid concern when it comes to um
strpheric carousels but it's also one
that points out to the fact that
essentially you would need to plan
carefully have contingency plans and you
could not rely on just one actor doing
this right because this is a worldwide
thing could someone go up and put
something sure maybe they could before
they were stopped but that's not how you
would achieve anything to achieve
anything you would need a carefully
planned thing with contingency plans for
what happens if we need to stop for
instance I've done research on what
would happen if a volcanic eruption
happened while you're doing this what
would you do and well it turns out that
you know then you would ramp down or
maybe shift where you're putting the
aerosols to try to manage this is true
geoengineering you understand your
planet and you interact in a way to your
benefit yeah the key difference is
really in the word deliberate when we
say what does geoengineering mean and a
lot of people ask me well haven't we
been geoengineering the planet already
uh with all the greenhouse gases maybe
in a way but the point of gineering we
say deliberate because this would be the
first time we consciously decide to
globally affect climate to our
benefit yeah now what about unintended
consequences because you do something
here something else has to happen over
there so what do you anticipate or what
have you seen that's way too polite
Uh, how can this go horribly wrong?
There you go. That is a perfectly fair
question. The things you look that you
know could go wrong and then there are
the things you don't know can go wrong.
For something as catastrophic as Earth's
atmosphere, where does your confidence
come from? Our confidence comes from a
lot of different observation. The main
one being we do have an upper bound for
how wrong things can go. And that's
again Pinatubo. If a volcano can dump 17
or 20 million tons of sulfate all at
once into the stratosphere into the
stratosphere and things happened after
that, right? Temperatures cooled. There
were changes in atmospheric chemistry
and so on. But fundamentally that's
really as catastrophic as it can get.
And we've been able to understand what
happened there. Right? On top of all of
that, all of these sulfate came down.
Yes. But there is so much more. When we
talk about sulfate, the reason we do
that is because we understand the
environmental impacts. They're not good
for sure, but we understand them. Now,
you could be thinking of what if we try
to engineer a perfect compound to put in
the stratosphere instead of sulfate,
something that works better, that is not
as toxic. You could do that. People are
thinking about that. That's legit. But
in that case, that's not something that
we understand how it interacts with the
environment long term. Well, sulfate is
something we understand very well. So, I
would say that it's the devil, you know,
right? It's a devil we know. It's we
understand the upper bound of how wrong.
You mean you have experience with it.
You've seen it happen in before. And
just to be clear, when the rain comes
out, you acidify you can acidify regions
that could be harmful to wildlife or
plant life. So again um in this as
opposed to when we do it through
pollution these aerosols would mix very
well and most of that actually would
fall most of the aerosols that would
fall over the oceans where really
sulfate is not something that affects
ocean acidification that much because
that's mostly carbon driven right again
that's a clear trade-off you would
increase pollution by a little bit right
10% more than now in many locations you
would spread it evenly but it will still
come down and does that as affect fact.
Yes, that's one of the again the that's
one of the things we definitely are
looking into and should be looking into
more actually quantifying and
understanding these trade-offs all the
things that could go wrong and it could
very well be that there are other things
that could go wrong that we don't know
yet or maybe we haven't thought about
which is why I always welcome other
climate scientists starting to look into
this field because there if suddenly we
found we found a roadblock something we
hadn't thought about nobody had thought
about in the last 30
that would make this no look we really
can't do this is too dangerous for this
reason okay at least we know right the
point of doing research is that then at
least we can say nope we've thought
about this here's the reason why we
can't do that so so I I have an analogy
from physics where in the large hadron
collider where they're creating energies
where there was some risk that you might
create a black hole
small risk it's a small black hole yeah
Yeah, that would then consume the earth
as it moved through. And so why do you
proceed even if that's such a small
risk? Because that's a small risk, but
it it's catastrophic to the planet. And
it turns out nature gave us examples.
Mhm. They're cosmic rays that come from
deep space, like the center of the
galaxy, at extremely high energies,
higher energy than anything we're making
inside the accelerator. And they collide
with molecules in our atmosphere and
it's not making black holes and we've
been here for 5 billion years. So, so
that's the that's that's the cosmic
peanut pinatibu or pinatuba punatuba.
That's the cosmic peanut butter. We have
nature to calibrate our expectations.
Yeah. Where are we with the simulations
and therefore then testing because we
can sit here and have a talking shop for
decades. It sounds like we have because
I'm part of the team now obviously right
but surely this testing goes on but
there must be something pushing back for
this not to be the case because this
sounds too good to be true to even if
it's a band-aid I think we'll take the
band-aid right now. Yeah. I think that's
part of the issue, right? And I would
say I work a lot with social scientists
as well and uh when it comes to this
topic and one time I was talking to one
of my colleagues and he really asked me
the same question like well then this
sounds good. Why aren't we doing it? And
we kind of set out to think about this
from a societal perspective. Right. As
any good scientist should do. You want
to look at all angles even angles
opposite what where you're trying to go
with it. Right. Yeah. And it is clear
that there are a lot of worries, right?
um when you talk to people about it,
they're like, "Wow, this sounds crazy."
And that's a perfectly good reaction.
Now, the question is when do and when do
people stop having that reaction? Will
it ever happen? And what is going to
take? Some people suggest that once
people are going to experience more and
more the effects of climate change,
that's going to change their mind.
Desperation is what you're saying. I
don't think I do not think we should
make plans out of desperation. Okay. On
the other hand, people are saying, well,
will there be a point in which we are
secure enough into our assessments that
this will convince most people, right? I
think that's kind of the angle that I
try to work with as in I think that the
main ways in which we're going to have
meaningful discussions about this and
move forward and maybe start even
outdoor testing is once we've put the
whole scientific community in a way
behind assessing robustly what do we
know and understand about something like
trosphicol injection. So at this point
there's just yeah honestly a handful of
scientists compared to the whole climate
science endeavor but the amount of
people that are looking into this is
getting bigger and bigger and so I think
we're pretty close to having broader
international assessments around the
topic which means that because
eventually when I maybe talk to policy
makers or to people in other country
they don't want to know the results of
my study or of my climate model run they
want to know what's the agreement. Yeah.
Right. So that's kind of why it's so
important to talk about this from an
international you need you need a
geopolitical scientific consensus
consensus. Imagine if they had thought
about that with something like the IPCC.
They really needed and once you have
that, you might be in a better position.
Then you get 10 people in a discussion.
You end up with 12 opinions. Of course,
always the case. But trying to get
nations to sit around a table and well,
it's not bothering me or you're not
putting that over my sky. You Oh, yeah.
They're not in my backyard. So, how far
are we from making something like this
implemented? I would have absolutely no
way to predict that I would say and be
honest. But I think we can for instance
look at climate change right and say
honestly the first assessment report
from the IPCC was in 1994 or was in the
early 90s and we've advanced greatly but
fundamentally conclusions haven't really
changed from 1994 which is we add
greenhouse gases that's bad that
increases warming and that's going to
make things worse. True. And there have
been I want to take in this case the
optimistic view of saying you know there
have been many advances when it comes to
climate change mitigation and policy.
Have there been enough? Definitely not.
But there have been right there have
been the Paris agreement. Now is the
United States of America out of the
Paris agreement? Yes it is. Will they
stay for long? I don't know. But you
know solar and wind are kind of
unstoppable. There's a lot of You're
right. They're going now. Yeah. Europe
is very much um into renewable. China is
even more than Europe and the United
States in spite of their carbon
footprint growing in some sectors. So
still making great advances. Yes, they
are because they understand they see it
as an economic issue. They don't even
care right now. They look at it as this
is a necessity for our economy unlike
unfortunately the supposed greatest
economy in the world. So, so in this
sense, I guess as a scientist, I'm not
going to be the one making the decision
about whether to do this or not. I
shouldn't be. It should be no sc, you
know, me and I'm sorry Neil as well,
we've met enough scientists, we
shouldn't be the one making this kind of
decisions. Come on. Well, you should if
you can laugh maniacally while you're
doing it. That's how it gets done.
Yeah, that's what you're doing. But we
can provide I still think that the
overall the strongest merit of science
is providing the information that can
let people make the good decisions. Will
they make good decisions all the time?
No. Because we're humans and we don't.
But that's not a good reason why not to
provide the the information that could
allow people to make these decisions.
So, let me land this plane by saying
every this stratospheric plane. Hey, let
me say every disaster movie begins with
people in charge ignoring the advice of
scientists.
Just saying. I hear you. That's it.
Danielle vit.
I love how you say that. Oh, I love
thinking about how to say it. Thanks for
joining us here. Oh my gosh. We've loved
your expertise and it put it in the mix
and stir it up and see what comes out
the other side. As these years progress,
we don't know where the valuation will
land. No, we know. Stop. Come on, guys.
It's America in 2025. We
America right now. America. So, again,
thank you for joining us. Thank you. So,
next up is Holly Jean Buck, associate
professor of environment and
sustainability at the University of
Buffalo. That's Sunni Sunni Buffalo.
Yeah. So, ain't that some when I was
growing up, no one would have imagined a
department with this title, environment
and sustainability. And that's why we're
in this mess that we are in right now
because nobody envisioned needing this
need needing this. Yeah. I also have her
down. Radcliffe Salata, climate justice
fellow at Harvard. Oh, that sounds like
a superhero. That sounds badass, right?
Cape and everything. And
interdisciplinary environmental social
scientist and uh with special attention
to how people engage with emerging
climate control technologies. Yeah,
that's a thing. That's like a whole
sociological thing. It has to be. It's
got to be. Why? Why not? And my favorite
title of them all, uh, author of a book
from 2019, after geoengineering,
climate tragedy, repair, and
restoration. Wow. Sounds very much like
the movie The Day After. Yeah. Or or
what's that other movie? Uh, uh, uh,
Snowpiercer. Snowpiercer. That was
after. Yeah, that that's where climate
people messed up. Yeah, exactly. Welcome
to Star Talk, Holly. Thanks so much.
It's great to be here. Do we call you
Holly Jean or just Holly? Either one's
great. Either one's great. Holly Jean's
kind of it's called Holly Jean. Holly
Jean sounds like a uh country western
star, you know. Hi Jean. Hi Jean. Uh so
we've just come off of a conversation
looking at the pros and cons of aerosol
injections into the atmosphere. Could
you just give us some options on how to
achieve the same effect that are banding
about today? the same effect as solar
geoengineering. Yeah. I mean, it's it's
it's got it's got a noble goal to sort
of protect Earth from our own
misdeeds regarding climate. And so, if
we don't do that, what are you going to
offer us? Um, am I was that Did I direct
that question to you? Oh, I'm sorry. Cuz
I had an answer.
Well, there's plan A. Shall we go over
plan A, please? Yes. So a whole bunch of
countries including the US up until a
minute ago, but states as well, New York
State have signed on to these net zero
targets, right? So ideas that it's net
zero carbon dioxide or greenhouse gas in
general. Yeah. I mean, they're a little
bit different targets, but yeah, the the
main idea is you don't put out more than
you can remove. Oh. And that needs to
happen by midcentury, which is actually
yesterday. Really soon.
It could have happened yesterday and
we've needs to happen yesterday. Yeah.
And we and we still got some issues if
if it would have happened yesterday. But
go ahead. So basically remaking our
whole energy system, right? Our built
environment. It's a big transformation.
That's that's why people are talking
about Yeah. geoengineering. All right.
So I get that. And this aerosol in the
atmosphere solution sounds so
Bonvillain. It it it does sound sexy,
doesn't it? You know, it sounds like
this should be in a movie, right? But
why not just take the carbon dioxide out
of the atmosphere and they don't have to
worry about any of this? Well, you sound
like my mother. You know what you need?
You need a sitcom. Why don't you have a
sitcom?
In other words, yeah, that's Go ahead.
We do need to do some of that, but
there's a limit at how much we can do. I
mean, think about think about all the
effort it took to take it out of the
ground, right? all the pipes, all the
refining, all the distribution, all of
that infrastructure. We're talking about
building that basically all over again
to put it back underground. So, and
there are limited places where you can
actually store CO2. Yeah, it's
interesting sort of macro way to see
that. It is. Yeah, that's a really
interesting way to look at it because
you never really consider how much
infrastructure is involved in just oil
extraction and then refinery just that
let alone everything else involved to
get it to you where you know everything
which I can put it I don't have to bury
it do I for example the white cliffs of
do that's limestone cliffs and that's a
repository of carbon from our
environment and they're not buried but
not that we're making that but I'm just
that didn't involve a pipe to put it
back into the ground. Yeah. So, people
talk about closed system and open system
carbon removal. So, in a closed system,
you would have an injection well. You'd
be injecting that into rock formations
deep underground. You more or less know
where it is. But what you're just
talking about is more of an open system
approach. Putting it into the ocean,
putting it into fields where you can
make rocks weather faster. That's a bit
trickier because it's harder to measure
what's going on. How are we transporting
this? Because you've got certain
industries that produce an awful lot of
CO2 and then they don't have somewhere
right on their doorstep to screw all
this away. I'll call it that. So, how
are we pipes one? Are we transporting it
in any other way? Barges, rail, trucks,
the same as the same as oil. It's
exactly the same. two trucks go opposite
directions on the highway. They took
each other in two.
So that's that that was my that was my
soft point. That's funny. So if we're
spending how many billions on carbon
capture plants, right? And I just say to
myself, just are we actually is that a
real thing? We spent a few billions
trying to start them. We'll see if they
still it's still a nent. Yeah, very much
nent. Okay. Are they better than trees
at capturing goods? That's a very good
question. I love that. Yeah, I mean
trees are great for a whole bunch of
reasons. The thing with these land-based
approaches, we need more of them for
providing habitat for a million reasons,
but we can't expect nature to do all the
work here of what we took out of the
ground. Yes. Right. We have limited land
for for trees unfortunately because we
want that land for growing food and and
so basically we should stop eating.
That's really answer here. Stop eating
and heating. Eating and heating. Let it
go. So, I get many of the land solutions
to this, but how about ocean solutions?
Other than CO2 just getting absorbed
into the water, surely there are
creatures out there that would value
some uptake in CO2. If you're talking
about the whale concept, that one might
not scale to the levels we need it to.
But if you're talking about plankton on
the other hand, that seems more
promising. These are really early stages
of research, though. But the theory
seems really positive. So you how does
it work? What's the procedure?
Basically, the concept of ocean iron
fertilization would be to add nutrients
to the ocean to create a big plankton
bloom. The plankton falls down to the
bottom of the ocean. What do plankton
blooms have anything to do with CO2? Or
are these the photosynthetic plankton?
Yeah. Yeah. Oh, like a tree. Yeah. Yeah,
like a doing what a plant would do,
right? Yeah, exactly. Oh, okay. The
light bulb went on. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. So, it's an LED light bulb.
I would expect nothing. Thank you. So,
you're growing plankton in the presence
of the CO2. No differently how you would
grow trees in the presence of CO2.
Except oceans are huge. So, what happens
when the plankton die and then they fall
to the bottom? Then what? I mean ideally
that CO2 would stay at the bottom but
that this is the issue with this
category of approaches is that the
science is really early and the science
is expensive right because you need
ocean chartered vehicles going out there
doing experiments and we just haven't
really begun that process it's not a
laboratory but the potential for this
sink and die of the phytolankton is
capturing massive amounts of CO2 but
surely that has some toxicity in in the
ecosystem. Yeah. What does it do with
oxygen, right? Exactly. There's little
creatures down there that they do
matter. I care about them. What was the
little microscopic creature that was
here that put all the oxygen in the air?
Oh, yeah. Cyanobacteria. Cyanobacteria,
right? Yeah. So, there are consequences
that happen when you do this kind of
stuff. Yeah. But they would absorb CO2
and release oxygen. So, what what's so
bad about that? I mean, for ocean life,
what do you have against oxygen?
What kind of what kind of a person are
you?
Remember, I'm a sociologist. Okay, now
we get it.
No, it's it's this lack of joined up
thinking that's got us in this situation
in the first place. So, surely we've got
to look at the effect of every living
thing in any environment we go into. But
the problem is we need to explore. We
need to research further. And it doesn't
look as if there's a desire or possibly
the finances to do it. Or am I wrong?
It's just short of what's needed to
really get into some of these questions.
All right. So if if you're not a
sociologist of plankton, you'd be a
sociologist of people. So how do the
effects of all these efforts land
differently ac around the world either
economically or geographically? Well,
the rest of the world is ripping us off.
That's the first thing. And it's time
for us to make sure that we have
dominance. The kind of dominance that
comes from drill, baby drill. Thank you,
Sure.
Chew on the nose. No, I mean, there's a
couple of issues here. One is that
unless people grasp the climate change,
the energy transition, the situation
we're in, talking to them about these
ideas is probably not going to land very
well. because if you don't know the you
know why we would try it in the first
place, right? So, but there are
countries who have nowhere near the
resources to participate in this. So,
they would be passive observers,
possibly even victims of our efforts or
our folly. And oddly enough, those
countries are far more amendable to the
solutions that we need to enact in order
to solve this problem. You would think
that from what you said that they would
be the ones who would be most skeptical.
They're not. We're the freaking problem.
Was that right? Yeah. Yeah. We actually
do have some research that colleagues of
mine have done in several different
countries trying to learn about people's
perceptions and they did find more
support for countries in the global
south, countries that are facing a lot
of climate impacts right now. But I
would caution that with most people
haven't heard anything about any of
these approaches. So what somebody hears
in a survey or initially is going to be
shaped by what people say about it other
messengers their friends and family once
they start to discuss it with other
people which is I think it was this
year's Yale report that still it's
somewhere around upwards 53% of people
say they rarely or never talk about
climate change with friends or family.
That's this year's report. So it's we're
we're just not even discussing it at
all. We're we're la. So right right now
this little group here are outliers.
So how how do we then think about this
the social consequences or ethical
issues of this down the line? How do you
handle that? I mean I think the first
step is just to involve more people in
the conversation. Okay. And that can be
done a lot of ways. It hardly ever
happens. You need agencies or
organizations that'll do that. Yeah. You
need actually dedicated staff to work on
it. It's a big challenge. So, who's the
most important voices that need to be
heard in in regards of your voice? No.
My voice. Lean into the microphone. My
voice. Go. Do it ASMR.
It's my voice. Yes. Holly Jean is
speaking. Is it Is it the powerful rich
western nations or is it the global
south? Is it African nations? Is that is
there a demographic that or group? Well,
everybody has a stake and everybody
needs to do something with with climate
and energy, right? Nobody can sit by
Yeah. Nobody Nobody's getting out of
this one. No. So, what of all the
options that you've seen, what horse
would you bet on as the most effective
but also most humane? If I may, I think
we need to triple nuclear capacity. We
have a goal about that. or if we did, I
hope we keep doing that. We need
abundant clean energy for people um
because a lot of people don't have
access to energy and turn the tables on
the anti-nuke movement that had been so
strong over the decades. I hope so.
We've seen public sentiment on that
shift pretty quickly actually. So that's
the show we had with Katherine Huff on
the small modular reactors, right?
Because the nuclear reactors can be
scaled and they and they can be built
anywhere you need them, right? I don't
think they're at the point where they
can commercially
put them in. Although we've had nuclear
reactors in submarines. Oh yeah. For
some time. So there must be some way to
scale it and make it uh Oh yeah.
practical. Oh yeah. Completely.
Completely. Plus there's not as much
spoken of how dependent France has been
on nuclear power for decades. And it's
not even a thing, right? They'll protest
anything at any time of day except
smoking. I give you I give you a true
example about France's nuclear program.
New I have to say new killer. Stop
giving me France cancer. Every every
time you're imitating a French person.
They put they put a nuclear power plant
on the northwest coast of France closer
to London than it was to Paris. That's
how much the French love the Brits.
Okay. So, is there going to be a mistake
that we make in our attempts to do the
right thing? What are we most likely
going to get wrong? I mean, you can see
a lot of um problems considering that
we're dismantling our capacity to even
monitor what's going on in terms of, you
know, attacks on science and government.
So, yeah, there's tons of risks.
Although people who are concerned, I
share their concern. Okay. Give us
something positive here. Please tell us
tell us what are you hopeful for? Well,
I I think that public um thinking about
this can and will shift. The question is
one of timing. That's why we're talking
about geoengineering. Yeah. But you
would know better than others what would
help make that shift. What kind of
forces need to be in play to change an
attitude or perspective? Has there been
something in history that you're
familiar with where a a public sea
change of opinion has happened for the
better? because that's kind of the shift
that we need to have for this at least
here in America. Some of the examples
people point to are the civil rights
movement, okay, gay marriage, these um
social things. I think it's a little bit
trickier when you're talking about
reconfiguring the built environment, but
but the mindset has to happen first. How
about we get ahead of the story? There
seems to be a fair bit of misinformation
regarding climate, global warming or
disinformation. Well, that's exactly it.
So, there's this disinformation. How
about we get ahead of that narrative and
start to put out real solid strong and
take that 53% and make it much much
bigger. I mean, you asked me about
technologies and I said nuclear, but we
have to also shift the framing into
investing in social infrastructure,
investing in people. And I think that
because we have an administrations
that's backing away from that, that's
crashing our social infrastructure,
people are going to recognize the value
in the relationships, the agencies,
functioning government, and we'll build
that capacity to when we do have the
political will to build these new
technologies, we'll have the social will
that matches it. Not to put words in
your mouth, but are you saying that the
dismantling of these social structures,
these social
institutions
may awaken people to their need in ways
that they had previously taken for
granted? Yeah, we had a problem even
before Trump where we passed all this
money in the US for climate and energy
projects and we couldn't get it spent
fast enough because we didn't have
enough people in the agencies to spend
it, to review it, to even hear about the
grants. People on the ground didn't
know. And now people are realizing you
need people to do this. It's not just
about investing in tech. So the what I
was going to say is it takes money. It
actually takes money to spend money. It
it takes money to educate people. And
how do you combat the other side which
which is dis
disinformation? Fossil fuel companies
through their so-called outlets and
foundations, right? They spent $900
million that was tracked last year. $900
million on disinformation. So we got to
come up against that, you know. So that
I mean that's a serious thing. But I and
we got to like land this plane real
quick. But presumably if you ask them
they wouldn't say it was disinformation.
They would just say it's information. So
the what you really have to do is
empower the listener to know the
difference from a sociological
perspective. How do you do that? Yeah.
You don't go to people and say you're
misinformed because then it's like
you're saying, "Well, you're dumb. You
didn't know the right information." So
that's my problem. I've been an idiot.
Jesus.
You you you give them information that's
grounded in science and you say they're
really hard tradeoffs. Um but you have
choices. It's important that you don't
make people feel like all of this stuff
is going to take away their freedom.
That's what they're worried about.
Saying we do such a good job. Start
calling electricity Liberty Juice.
Liberty Juice. Liberty Juice. We need a
focus group. You want to save America?
What you got to do is get a car that
runs on Liberty Juice.
All right, this thought experiment.
Pretty good, Chuck. I think that's the
answers are out there. Yeah. Say we say
we fall on a technology that is
practical, cost effective, give or take,
and we do get ourselves to these
pre-industrial zero levels. Will we not
think, well, it doesn't matter. We can
burn all the fossil fuels we want
because we can control it now. You okay
with that? That's a that's a big
argument. Yeah, man. Is that is that
likely to happen for us because we've
seen we've driven ourselves if we become
good at it. Yeah. Then drill, baby
drill. Who cares? I just think burning
rocks is kind of archaic. Like I just
think we can do better. I mean,
whatever. I think we can come out with
something that outco competes that and
also economically then and then the
economics drives it. But do we not as as
a species do that thing anyway where we
tie our own shoelaces together or find a
way to shoot oursel in the foot?
Speak for yourself, dude. I was
I was I was good. Uh well, I think the
danger that many people see is that once
you have anything that's viable on a
geoengineering scale, which we're
nowhere near, by the way, but once you
do that, fossil fuel companies will then
use that as a cudgel to say we can keep
burning fuel, you know. So, a lot of
people are like, that's my concern.
Yeah, a lot of people are like, you
foresee that presumably. Yeah, I wrote I
wrote a book called Ending Fossil Fuels
that was about the challenge of how you
end fossil fuels and the geopolitics of
it are really tough because some
countries really depend on this for
their revenue and their legitimacy and I
could see them saying well let's keep
keep on going. So countries like
Venezuela or Qatar or Russia. Yeah.
Yeah. These are all the countries. Yeah.
So it's a whole other thing. We're
saying stop burning fossil fuel and
you'll bankrupt the country. Yeah, they
built their whole economy on it. Unless
we're willing to make massive transfers
of finance, which we apparently aren't.
Yeah. Well, then that becomes your
problem as a sociologist.
I'll take all the problems. You fix it.
A lot of work. I love it. Well,
Professor Buck, thank you for being on
Star Talk. Yes. Delighted to have you on
the Azimov panel and that you you you
guys kidnapped her for the for Star
Talk. Very good job here. Thank you.
Thanks so much.
And uh just so you know how deeply I
respect your profession. My father is a
sociologist and uh I I was actually
received a sociology award from Congress
just they I think they appreciated how
much I always tried to think about the
impact of science on people and I was
very moved by that and so I wish you
well. Thank you. And maybe some luck. We
might need some too based on how stuff
goes down. Yeah, with the human
interaction function that's out there.
Yeah, we're screwed. Thank you, Chuck,
for that.
So, Holly, Chuck, Gary, pleasure. Always
good. Always a pleasure. This has been
another edition of Star Talk special
edition.
Geoengineering, the good, the bad, the
ugly. Until next time, you're the Grass
Tyson. Keep looking up.
[Music]